room in the extremest agitation.  Tears also gushed from the eyes of
Clerval, as he read the account of my misfortune.

"I can offer you no consolation, my friend," said he; "your disaster is
irreparable.  What do you intend to do?"

"To go instantly to Geneva: come with me, Henry, to order the horses."

During our walk, Clerval endeavoured to say a few words of consolation;
he could only express his heartfelt sympathy.  "Poor William!" said he,
"dear lovely child, he now sleeps with his angel mother!  Who that had
seen him bright and joyous in his young beauty, but must weep over his
untimely loss!  To die so miserably; to feel the murderer's grasp!  How
much more a murdered that could destroy radiant innocence!  Poor little
fellow! one only consolation have we; his friends mourn and weep, but
he is at rest. The pang is over, his sufferings are at an end for ever.
A sod covers his gentle form, and he knows no pain.  He can no longer
be a subject for pity; we must reserve that for his miserable
survivors."

Clerval spoke thus as we hurried through the streets; the words
impressed themselves on my mind and I remembered them afterwards in
solitude.  But now, as soon as the horses arrived, I hurried into a
cabriolet, and bade farewell to my friend.

My journey was very melancholy.  At first I wished to hurry on, for I
longed to console and sympathise with my loved and sorrowing friends;
but when I drew near my native town, I slackened my progress.  I could
hardly sustain the multitude of feelings that crowded into my mind.  I
passed through scenes familiar to my youth, but which I had not seen
for nearly six years.  How altered every thing might be during that
time!  One sudden and desolating change had taken place; but a thousand
little circumstances might have by degrees worked other alterations,
which, although they were done more tranquilly, might not be the less
decisive.  Fear overcame me; I dared no advance, dreading a thousand
nameless evils that made me tremble, although I was unable to define
them.  I remained two days at Lausanne, in this painful state of mind.
I contemplated the lake:  the waters were placid; all around was calm;
and the snowy mountains, 'the palaces of nature,' were not changed.  By
degrees the calm and heavenly scene restored me, and I continued my
journey towards Geneva.

The road ran by the side of the lake, which became narrower as I
approached my native town.  I discovered more distinctly the black
sides of Jura, and the bright summit of Mont Blanc.  I wept like a
child.  "Dear mountains! my own beautiful lake! how do you welcome your
wanderer?  Your summits are clear; the sky and lake are blue and
placid.  Is this to prognosticate peace, or to mock at my unhappiness?"

I fear, my friend, that I shall render myself tedious by dwelling on
these preliminary circumstances; but they were days of comparative
happiness, and I think of them with pleasure.  My country, my beloved
country! who but a native can tell the delight I took in again
beholding thy streams, thy mountains, and, more than all, thy lovely
lake!

Yet, as I drew nearer home, grief and fear again overcame me.  Night
also closed around; and when I could hardly see the dark mountains, I
felt still more gloomily.  The picture appeared a vast and dim scene of
evil, and I foresaw obscurely that I was destined to become the most
wretched of human beings.  Alas!  I prophesied truly, and failed only
in one single circumstance, that in all the misery I imagined and
dreaded, I did not conceive the hundredth part of the anguish I was
destined to endure.  It was completely dark when I arrived in the
environs of Geneva; the gates of the town were already shut; and I was
obliged to pass the night at Secheron, a village at the distance of
half a league from the city.  The sky was serene; and, as I was unable
to rest, I resolved to visit the spot where my poor William had been
murdered.  As I could not pass through the town, I was obliged to cross
the lake in a boat to arrive at Plainpalais.  During this short voyage
I saw the lightning playing on the summit of Mont Blanc in the most
beautiful figures.  The storm appeared to approach rapidly, and, on
landing, I ascended a low hill, that I might observe its progress.  It
advanced; the heavens were clouded, and I soon felt the rain coming
slowly in large drops, but its violence quickly increased.

I quitted my seat, and walked on, although the darkness and storm
increased every minute, and the thunder burst with a terrific crash
over my head.  It was echoed from Saleve, the Juras, and the Alps of
Savoy; vivid flashes of lightning dazzled my eyes, illuminating the
lake, making it appear like a vast sheet of fire; then for an instant
every thing seemed of a pitchy darkness, until the eye recovered itself
from the preceding flash.  The storm, as is often the case in
Switzerland, appeared at once in various parts of the heavens.  The
most violent storm hung exactly north of the town, over the part of the
lake which lies between the promontory of Belrive and the village of
Copet.  Another storm enlightened Jura with faint flashes; and another
darkened and sometimes disclosed the Mole, a peaked mountain to the
east of the lake.

While I watched the tempest, so beautiful yet terrific, I wandered on
with a hasty step.  This noble war in the sky elevated my spirits; I
clasped my hands, and exclaimed aloud, "William, dear angel! this is
thy funeral, this thy dirge!" As I said these words, I perceived in the
gloom a figure which stole from behind a clump of trees near me; I
stood fixed, gazing intently:  I could not be mistaken.  A flash of
lightning illuminated the object, and discovered its shape plainly to
me; its gigantic stature, and the deformity of its aspect more hideous
than belongs to humanity, instantly informed me that it was the wretch,
the filthy daemon, to whom I had given life.  What did he there?  Could
he be (I shuddered at the conception) the murderer of my brother?  No
sooner did that idea cross my imagination, than I became convinced of
its truth; my teeth chattered, and I was forced to lean against a tree
for support.  The figure passed me quickly, and I lost it in the gloom.

Nothing in human shape could have destroyed the fair child.  HE was the
murderer!  I could not doubt it.  The mere presence of the idea was an
irresistible proof of the fact.  I thought of pursuing the devil; but
it would have been in vain, for another flash discovered him to me
hanging among the rocks of the nearly perpendicular ascent of Mont
Saleve, a hill that bounds Plainpalais on the south.  He soon reached
the summit, and disappeared.

I remained motionless.  The thunder ceased; but the rain still
continued, and the scene was enveloped in an impenetrable darkness.  I
revolved in my mind the events which I had until now sought to forget:
the whole train of my progress toward the creation; the appearance of
the works of my own hands at my bedside; its departure.  Two years had
now nearly elapsed since the night on which he first received life; and
was this his first crime?  Alas!  I had turned loose into the world a
depraved wretch, whose delight was in carnage and misery; had he not
murdered my brother?

No one can conceive the anguish I suffered during the remainder of the
night, which I spent, cold and wet, in the open air.  But I did not
feel the inconvenience of the weather; my imagination was busy in
scenes of evil and despair.  I considered the being whom I had cast
among mankind, and endowed with the will and power to effect purposes
of horror, such as the deed which he had now done, nearly in the light
of my own vampire, my own spirit let loose from the grave, and forced
to destroy all that was dear to me.

Day dawned; and I directed my steps towards the town.  The gates were
open, and I hastened to my father's house.  My first thought was to
discover what I knew of the murderer, and cause instant pursuit to be
made.  But I paused when I reflected on the story that I had to tell. A
being whom I myself had formed, and endued with life, had met me at
midnight among the precipices of an inaccessible mountain.  I
remembered also the nervous fever with which I had been seized just at
the time that I dated my creation, and which would give an air of
delirium to a tale otherwise so utterly improbable.  I well knew that
if any other had communicated such a relation to me, I should have
looked upon it as the ravings of insanity.  Besides, the strange nature
of the animal would elude all pursuit, even if I were so far credited
as to persuade my relatives to commence it.  And then of what use would
be pursuit?  Who could arrest a creature capable of scaling the
overhanging sides of Mont Saleve?  These reflections determined me, and
I resolved to remain silent.

It was about five in the morning when I entered my father's house.  I
told the servants not to disturb the family, and went into the library
to attend their usual hour of rising.

Six years had elapsed, passed in a dream but for one indelible trace,
and I stood in the same place where I had last embraced my father
before my departure for Ingolstadt.  Beloved and venerable parent!  He
still remained to me.  I gazed on the picture of my mother, which stood
over the mantel-piece.  It was an historical subject, painted at my
father's desire, and represented Caroline Beaufort in an agony of
despair, kneeling by the coffin of her dead father.  Her garb was
rustic, and her cheek pale; but there was an air of dignity and beauty,
that hardly permitted the sentiment of pity.  Below this picture was a
miniature of William; and my tears flowed when I looked upon it.  While
I was thus engaged, Ernest entered:  he had heard me arrive, and
hastened to welcome me:  "Welcome, my dearest Victor," said he.  "Ah! I
wish you had come three months ago, and then you would have found us
all joyous and delighted.  You come to us now to share a misery which
nothing can alleviate; yet your presence will, I hope, revive our
father, who seems sinking under his misfortune; and your persuasions
will induce poor Elizabeth to cease her vain and tormenting
self-accusations.--Poor William! he was our darling and our pride!"

Tears, unrestrained, fell from my brother's eyes; a sense of mortal
agony crept over my frame.  Before, I had only imagined the
wretchedness of my desolated home; the reality came on me as a new, and
a not less terrible, disaster.  I tried to calm Ernest; I enquired more
minutely concerning my father, and here I named my cousin.

"She most of all," said Ernest, "requires consolation; she accused
herself of having caused the death of my brother, and that made her
very wretched.  But since the murderer has been discovered--"

"The murderer discovered!  Good God! how can that be? who could attempt
to pursue him?  It is impossible; one might as well try to overtake the
winds, or confine a mountain-stream with a straw.  I saw him too; he
was free last night!"

"I do not know what you mean," replied my brother, in accents of
wonder, "but to us the discovery we have made completes our misery.  No
one would believe it at first; and even now Elizabeth will not be
convinced, notwithstanding all the evidence.  Indeed, who would credit
that Justine Moritz, who was so amiable, and fond of all the family,
could suddenly become so capable of so frightful, so appalling a crime?"

"Justine Moritz!  Poor, poor girl, is she the accused?  But it is
wrongfully; every one knows that; no one believes it, surely, Ernest?"

"No one did at first; but several circumstances came out, that have
almost forced conviction upon us; and her own behaviour has been so
confused, as to add to the evidence of facts a weight that, I fear,
leaves no hope for doubt.  But she will be tried today, and you will
then hear all."

He then related that, the morning on which the murder of poor William
had been discovered, Justine had been taken ill, and confined to her
bed for several days.  During this interval, one of the servants,
happening to examine the apparel she had worn on the night of the
murder, had discovered in her pocket the picture of my mother, which
had been judged to be the temptation of the murderer.  The servant
instantly showed it to one of the others, who, without saying a word to
any of the family, went to a magistrate; and, upon their deposition,
Justine was apprehended.  On being charged with the fact, the poor girl
confirmed the suspicion in a great measure by her extreme confusion of
manner.

This was a strange tale, but it did not shake my faith; and I replied
earnestly, "You are all mistaken; I know the murderer.  Justine, poor,
good Justine, is innocent."

At that instant my father entered.  I saw unhappiness deeply impressed
on his countenance, but he endeavoured to welcome me cheerfully; and,
after we had exchanged our mournful greeting, would have introduced
some other topic than that of our disaster, had not Ernest exclaimed,
"Good God, papa!  Victor says that he knows who was the murderer of
poor William."

"We do also, unfortunately," replied my father, "for indeed I had
rather have been for ever ignorant than have discovered so much
depravity and ungratitude in one I valued so highly."

"My dear father, you are mistaken; Justine is innocent."

"If she is, God forbid that she should suffer as guilty.  She is to be
tried today, and I hope, I sincerely hope, that she will be acquitted."

This speech calmed me.  I was firmly convinced in my own mind that
Justine, and indeed every human being, was guiltless of this murder.  I
had no fear, therefore, that any circumstantial evidence could be
brought forward strong enough to convict her.  My tale was not one to
announce publicly; its astounding horror would be looked upon as
madness by the vulgar.  Did any one indeed exist, except I, the
creator, who would believe, unless his senses convinced him, in the
existence of the living monument of presumption and rash ignorance
which I had let loose upon the world?

We were soon joined by Elizabeth.  Time had altered her since I last
beheld her; it had endowed her with loveliness surpassing the beauty of
her childish years.  There was the same candour, the same vivacity, but
it was allied to an expression more full of sensibility and intellect.
She welcomed me with the greatest affection.  "Your arrival, my dear
cousin," said she, "fills me with hope.  You perhaps will find some
means to justify my poor guiltless Justine.  Alas! who is safe, if she
be convicted of crime?  I rely on her innocence as certainly as I do
upon my own.  Our misfortune is doubly hard to us; we have not only
lost that lovely darling boy, but this poor girl, whom I sincerely
love, is to be torn away by even a worse fate.  If she is condemned, I
never shall know joy more.  But she will not, I am sure she will not;
and then I shall be happy again, even after the sad death of my little
William."

"She is innocent, my Elizabeth," said I, "and that shall be proved;
fear nothing, but let your spirits be cheered by the assurance of her
acquittal."

"How kind and generous you are! every one else believes in her guilt,
and that made me wretched, for I knew that it was impossible:  and to
see every one else prejudiced in so deadly a manner rendered me
hopeless and despairing."  She wept.

"Dearest niece," said my father, "dry your tears.  If she is, as you
believe, innocent, rely on the justice of our laws, and the activity
with which I shall prevent the slightest shadow of partiality."



Chapter 8

We passed a few sad hours until eleven o'clock, when the trial was to
commence.  My father and the rest of the family being obliged to attend
as witnesses, I accompanied them to the court.  During the whole of
this wretched mockery of justice I suffered living torture.  It was to
be decided whether the result of my curiosity and lawless devices would
cause the death of two of my fellow beings:  one a smiling babe full of
innocence and joy, the other far more dreadfully murdered, with every
aggravation of infamy that could make the murder memorable in horror.
Justine also was a girl of merit and possessed qualities which promised
to render her life happy; now all was to be obliterated in an
ignominious grave, and I the cause!  A thousand times rather would I
have confessed myself guilty of the crime ascribed to Justine, but I
was absent when it was committed, and such a declaration would have
been considered as the ravings of a madman and would not have
exculpated her who suffered through me.

The appearance of Justine was calm.  She was dressed in mourning, and
her countenance, always engaging, was rendered, by the solemnity of her
feelings, exquisitely beautiful.  Yet she appeared confident in
innocence and did not tremble, although gazed on and execrated by
thousands, for all the kindness which her beauty might otherwise have
excited was obliterated in the minds of the spectators by the
imagination of the enormity she was supposed to have committed.  She
was tranquil, yet her tranquillity was evidently constrained; and as
her confusion had before been adduced as a proof of her guilt, she
worked up her mind to an appearance of courage.  When she entered the
court she threw her eyes round it and quickly discovered where we were
seated.  A tear seemed to dim her eye when she saw us, but she quickly
recovered herself, and a look of sorrowful affection seemed to attest
her utter guiltlessness.

The trial began, and after the advocate against her had stated the
charge, several witnesses were called.  Several strange facts combined
against her, which might have staggered anyone who had not such proof
of her innocence as I had.  She had been out the whole of the night on
which the murder had been committed and towards morning had been
perceived by a market-woman not far from the spot where the body of the
murdered child had been afterwards found.  The woman asked her what she
did there, but she looked very strangely and only returned a confused
and unintelligible answer.  She returned to the house about eight
o'clock, and when one inquired where she had passed the night, she
replied that she had been looking for the child and demanded earnestly
if anything had been heard concerning him.  When shown the body, she
fell into violent hysterics and kept her bed for several days.  The
picture was then produced which the servant had found in her pocket;
and when Elizabeth, in a faltering voice, proved that it was the same
which, an hour before the child had been missed, she had placed round
his neck, a murmur of horror and indignation filled the court.

Justine was called on for her defence.  As the trial had proceeded, her
countenance had altered.  Surprise, horror, and misery were strongly
expressed.  Sometimes she struggled with her tears, but when she was
desired to plead, she collected her powers and spoke in an audible
although variable voice.

"God knows," she said, "how entirely I am innocent.  But I do not
pretend that my protestations should acquit me; I rest my innocence on
a plain and simple explanation of the facts which have been adduced
against me, and I hope the character I have always borne will incline
my judges to a favourable interpretation where any circumstance appears
doubtful or suspicious."

She then related that, by the permission of Elizabeth, she had passed
the evening of the night on which the murder had been committed at the
house of an aunt at Chene, a village situated at about a league from
Geneva.  On her return, at about nine o'clock, she met a man who asked
her if she had seen anything of the child who was lost.  She was
alarmed by this account and passed several hours in looking for him,
when the gates of Geneva were shut, and she was forced to remain
several hours of the night in a barn belonging to a cottage, being
unwilling to call up the inhabitants, to whom she was well known.  Most
of the night she spent here watching; towards morning she believed that
she slept for a few minutes; some steps disturbed her, and she awoke.
It was dawn, and she quitted her asylum, that she might again endeavour
to find my brother.  If she had gone near the spot where his body lay,
it was without her knowledge.  That she had been bewildered when
questioned by the market-woman was not surprising, since she had passed
a sleepless night and the fate of poor William was yet uncertain.
Concerning the picture she could give no account.

"I know," continued the unhappy victim, "how heavily and fatally this
one circumstance weighs against me, but I have no power of explaining
it; and when I have expressed my utter ignorance, I am only left to
conjecture concerning the probabilities by which it might have been
placed in my pocket.  But here also I am checked.  I believe that I
have no enemy on earth, and none surely would have been so wicked as to
destroy me wantonly.  Did the murderer place it there?  I know of no
opportunity afforded him for so doing; or, if I had, why should he have
stolen the jewel, to part with it again so soon?

"I commit my cause to the justice of my judges, yet I see no room for
hope.  I beg permission to have a few witnesses examined concerning my
character, and if their testimony shall not overweigh my supposed
guilt, I must be condemned, although I would pledge my salvation on my
innocence."

Several witnesses were called who had known her for many years, and
they spoke well of her; but fear and hatred of the crime of which they
supposed her guilty rendered them timorous and unwilling to come
forward.  Elizabeth saw even this last resource, her excellent
dispositions and irreproachable conduct, about to fail the accused,
when, although violently agitated, she desired permission to address
the court.

"I am," said she, "the cousin of the unhappy child who was murdered, or
rather his sister, for I was educated by and have lived with his
parents ever since and even long before his birth.  It may therefore be
judged indecent in me to come forward on this occasion, but when I see
a fellow creature about to perish through the cowardice of her
pretended friends, I wish to be allowed to speak, that I may say what I
know of her character.  I am well acquainted with the accused.  I have
lived in the same house with her, at one time for five and at another
for nearly two years.  During all that period she appeared to me the
most amiable and benevolent of human creatures.  She nursed Madame
Frankenstein, my aunt, in her last illness, with the greatest affection
and care and afterwards attended her own mother during a tedious
illness, in a manner that excited the admiration of all who knew her,
after which she again lived in my uncle's house, where she was beloved
by all the family.  She was warmly attached to the child who is now
dead and acted towards him like a most affectionate mother.  For my own
part, I do not hesitate to say that, notwithstanding all the evidence
produced against her, I believe and rely on her perfect innocence.  She
had no temptation for such an action; as to the bauble on which the
chief proof rests, if she had earnestly desired it, I should have
willingly given it to her, so much do I esteem and value her."

A murmur of approbation followed Elizabeth's simple and powerful
appeal, but it was excited by her generous interference, and not in
favour of poor Justine, on whom the public indignation was turned with
renewed violence, charging her with the blackest ingratitude.  She
herself wept as Elizabeth spoke, but she did not answer.  My own
agitation and anguish was extreme during the whole trial.  I believed
in her innocence; I knew it.  Could the demon who had (I did not for a
minute doubt) murdered my brother also in his hellish sport have
betrayed the innocent to death and ignominy?  I could not sustain the
horror of my situation, and when I perceived that the popular voice and
the countenances of the judges had already condemned my unhappy victim,
I rushed out of the court in agony.  The tortures of the accused did
not equal mine; she was sustained by innocence, but the fangs of
remorse tore my bosom and would not forgo their hold.

I passed a night of unmingled wretchedness.  In the morning I went to
the court; my lips and throat were parched.  I dared not ask the fatal
question, but I was known, and the officer guessed the cause of my
visit.  The ballots had been thrown; they were all black, and Justine
was condemned.

I cannot pretend to describe what I then felt.  I had before
experienced sensations of horror, and I have endeavoured to bestow upon
them adequate expressions, but words cannot convey an idea of the
heart-sickening despair that I then endured.  The person to whom I
addressed myself added that Justine had already confessed her guilt.
"That evidence," he observed, "was hardly required in so glaring a
case, but I am glad of it, and, indeed, none of our judges like to
condemn a criminal upon circumstantial evidence, be it ever so
decisive."

This was strange and unexpected intelligence; what could it mean?  Had
my eyes deceived me?  And was I really as mad as the whole world would
believe me to be if I disclosed the object of my suspicions?  I
hastened to return home, and Elizabeth eagerly demanded the result.

"My cousin," replied I, "it is decided as you may have expected; all
judges had rather that ten innocent should suffer than that one guilty
should escape.  But she has confessed."

This was a dire blow to poor Elizabeth, who had relied with firmness
upon Justine's innocence.  "Alas!" said she.  "How shall I ever again
believe in human goodness?  Justine, whom I loved and esteemed as my
sister, how could she put on those smiles of innocence only to betray?
Her mild eyes seemed incapable of any severity or guile, and yet she
has committed a murder."

Soon after we heard that the poor victim had expressed a desire to see
my cousin.  My father wished her not to go but said that he left it to
her own judgment and feelings to decide.  "Yes," said Elizabeth, "I
will go, although she is guilty; and you, Victor, shall accompany me; I
cannot go alone."  The idea of this visit was torture to me, yet I
could not refuse.  We entered the gloomy prison chamber and beheld
Justine sitting on some straw at the farther end; her hands were
manacled, and her head rested on her knees.  She rose on seeing us
enter, and when we were left alone with her, she threw herself at the
feet of Elizabeth, weeping bitterly.  My cousin wept also.

"Oh, Justine!" said she.  "Why did you rob me of my last consolation?
I relied on your innocence, and although I was then very wretched, I
was not so miserable as I am now."

"And do you also believe that I am so very, very wicked?  Do you also
join with my enemies to crush me, to condemn me as a murderer?" Her
voice was suffocated with sobs.

"Rise, my poor girl," said Elizabeth; "why do you kneel, if you are
innocent?  I am not one of your enemies, I believed you guiltless,
notwithstanding every evidence, until I heard that you had yourself
declared your guilt.  That report, you say, is false; and be assured,
dear Justine, that nothing can shake my confidence in you for a moment,
but your own confession."

"I did confess, but I confessed a lie.  I confessed, that I might
obtain absolution; but now that falsehood lies heavier at my heart than
all my other sins.  The God of heaven forgive me!  Ever since I was
condemned, my confessor has besieged me; he threatened and menaced,
until I almost began to think that I was the monster that he said I
was.  He threatened excommunication and hell fire in my last moments if
I continued obdurate.  Dear lady, I had none to support me; all looked
on me as a wretch doomed to ignominy and perdition.  What could I do?
In an evil hour I subscribed to a lie; and now only am I truly
miserable."

She paused, weeping, and then continued, "I thought with horror, my
sweet lady, that you should believe your Justine, whom your blessed
aunt had so highly honoured, and whom you loved, was a creature capable
of a crime which none but the devil himself could have perpetrated.
Dear William! dearest blessed child!  I soon shall see you again in
heaven, where we shall all be happy; and that consoles me, going as I
am to suffer ignominy and death."

"Oh, Justine!  Forgive me for having for one moment distrusted you.
Why did you confess?  But do not mourn, dear girl.  Do not fear.  I
will proclaim, I will prove your innocence.  I will melt the stony
hearts of your enemies by my tears and prayers.  You shall not die!
You, my playfellow, my companion, my sister, perish on the scaffold!
No!  No!  I never could survive so horrible a misfortune."

Justine shook her head mournfully.  "I do not fear to die," she said;
"that pang is past.  God raises my weakness and gives me courage to
endure the worst.  I leave a sad and bitter world; and if you remember
me and think of me as of one unjustly condemned, I am resigned to the
fate awaiting me.  Learn from me, dear lady, to submit in patience to
the will of heaven!"

During this conversation I had retired to a corner of the prison room,
where I could conceal the horrid anguish that possessed me.  Despair!
Who dared talk of that?  The poor victim, who on the morrow was to pass
the awful boundary between life and death, felt not, as I did, such
deep and bitter agony.  I gnashed my teeth and ground them together,
uttering a groan that came from my inmost soul.  Justine started.  When
she saw who it was, she approached me and said, "Dear sir, you are very
kind to visit me; you, I hope, do not believe that I am guilty?"

I could not answer.  "No, Justine," said Elizabeth; "he is more
convinced of your innocence than I was, for even when he heard that you
had confessed, he did not credit it."

"I truly thank him.  In these last moments I feel the sincerest
gratitude towards those who think of me with kindness.  How sweet is
the affection of others to such a wretch as I am!  It removes more than
half my misfortune, and I feel as if I could die in peace now that my
innocence is acknowledged by you, dear lady, and your cousin."

Thus the poor sufferer tried to comfort others and herself.  She indeed
gained the resignation she desired.  But I, the true murderer, felt the
never-dying worm alive in my bosom, which allowed of no hope or
consolation.  Elizabeth also wept and was unhappy, but hers also was
the misery of innocence, which, like a cloud that passes over the fair
moon, for a while hides but cannot tarnish its brightness.  Anguish and
despair had penetrated into the core of my heart; I bore a hell within
me which nothing could extinguish.  We stayed several hours with
Justine, and it was with great difficulty that Elizabeth could tear
herself away.  "I wish," cried she, "that I were to die with you; I
cannot live in this world of misery."

Justine assumed an air of cheerfulness, while she with difficulty
repressed her bitter tears.  She embraced Elizabeth and said in a voice
of half-suppressed emotion, "Farewell, sweet lady, dearest Elizabeth,
my beloved and only friend; may heaven, in its bounty, bless and
preserve you; may this be the last misfortune that you will ever
suffer!  Live, and be happy, and make others so."

And on the morrow Justine died.  Elizabeth's heart-rending eloquence
failed to move the judges from their settled conviction in the
criminality of the saintly sufferer.  My passionate and indignant
appeals were lost upon them.  And when I received their cold answers
and heard the harsh, unfeeling reasoning of these men, my purposed
avowal died away on my lips.  Thus I might proclaim myself a madman,
but not revoke the sentence passed upon my wretched victim.  She
perished on the scaffold as a murderess!

From the tortures of my own heart, I turned to contemplate the deep and
voiceless grief of my Elizabeth.  This also was my doing!  And my
father's woe, and the desolation of that late so smiling home all was
the work of my thrice-accursed hands!  Ye weep, unhappy ones, but these
are not your last tears!  Again shall you raise the funeral wail, and
the sound of your lamentations shall again and again be heard!
Frankenstein, your son, your kinsman, your early, much-loved friend; he
who would spend each vital drop of blood for your sakes, who has no
thought nor sense of joy except as it is mirrored also in your dear
countenances, who would fill the air with blessings and spend his life
in serving you--he bids you weep, to shed countless tears; happy beyond
his hopes, if thus inexorable fate be satisfied, and if the destruction
pause before the peace of the grave have succeeded to your sad torments!

Thus spoke my prophetic soul, as, torn by remorse, horror, and despair,
I beheld those I loved spend vain sorrow upon the graves of William and
Justine, the first hapless victims to my unhallowed arts.



Chapter 9

Nothing is more painful to the human mind than, after the feelings have
been worked up by a quick succession of events, the dead calmness of
inaction and certainty which follows and deprives the soul both of hope
and fear.  Justine died, she rested, and I was alive.  The blood flowed
freely in my veins, but a weight of despair and remorse pressed on my
heart which nothing could remove.  Sleep fled from my eyes; I wandered
like an evil spirit, for I had committed deeds of mischief beyond
description horrible, and more, much more (I persuaded myself) was yet
behind.  Yet my heart overflowed with kindness and the love of virtue.
I had begun life with benevolent intentions and thirsted for the moment
when I should put them in practice and make myself useful to my fellow
beings.  Now all was blasted; instead of that serenity of conscience
which allowed me to look back upon the past with self-satisfaction, and
from thence to gather promise of new hopes, I was seized by remorse and
the sense of guilt, which hurried me away to a hell of intense tortures
such as no language can describe.

This state of mind preyed upon my health, which had perhaps never
entirely recovered from the first shock it had sustained.  I shunned
the face of man; all sound of joy or complacency was torture to me;
solitude was my only consolation--deep, dark, deathlike solitude.

My father observed with pain the alteration perceptible in my
disposition and habits and endeavoured by arguments deduced from the
feelings of his serene conscience and guiltless life to inspire me with
fortitude and awaken in me the courage to dispel the dark cloud which
brooded over me.  "Do you think, Victor," said he, "that I do not
suffer also?  No one could love a child more than I loved your
brother"--tears came into his eyes as he spoke--"but is it not a duty
to the survivors that we should refrain from augmenting their
unhappiness by an appearance of immoderate grief?  It is also a duty
owed to yourself, for excessive sorrow prevents improvement or
enjoyment, or even the discharge of daily usefulness, without which no
man is fit for society."

This advice, although good, was totally inapplicable to my case; I
should have been the first to hide my grief and console my friends if
remorse had not mingled its bitterness, and terror its alarm, with my
other sensations.  Now I could only answer my father with a look of
despair and endeavour to hide myself from his view.

About this time we retired to our house at Belrive.  This change was
particularly agreeable to me.  The shutting of the gates regularly at
ten o'clock and the impossibility of remaining on the lake after that
hour had rendered our residence within the walls of Geneva very irksome
to me.  I was now free.  Often, after the rest of the family had
retired for the night, I took the boat and passed many hours upon the
water.  Sometimes, with my sails set, I was carried by the wind; and
sometimes, after rowing into the middle of the lake, I left the boat to
pursue its own course and gave way to my own miserable reflections.  I
was often tempted, when all was at peace around me, and I the only
unquiet thing that wandered restless in a scene so beautiful and
heavenly--if I except some bat, or the frogs, whose harsh and
interrupted croaking was heard only when I approached the shore--often,
I say, I was tempted to plunge into the silent lake, that the waters
might close over me and my calamities forever.  But I was restrained,
when I thought of the heroic and suffering Elizabeth, whom I tenderly
loved, and whose existence was bound up in mine.  I thought also of my
father and surviving brother; should I by my base desertion leave them
exposed and unprotected to the malice of the fiend whom I had let loose
among them?

At these moments I wept bitterly and wished that peace would revisit my
mind only that I might afford them consolation and happiness.  But that
could not be.  Remorse extinguished every hope.  I had been the author
of unalterable evils, and I lived in daily fear lest the monster whom I
had created should perpetrate some new wickedness.  I had an obscure
feeling that all was not over and that he would still commit some
signal crime, which by its enormity should almost efface the
recollection of the past.  There was always scope for fear so long as
anything I loved remained behind.  My abhorrence of this fiend cannot
be conceived.  When I thought of him I gnashed my teeth, my eyes became
inflamed, and I ardently wished to extinguish that life which I had so
thoughtlessly bestowed.  When I reflected on his crimes and malice, my
hatred and revenge burst all bounds of moderation.  I would have made a
pilgrimage to the highest peak of the Andes, could I when there have
precipitated him to their base.  I wished to see him again, that I
might wreak the utmost extent of abhorrence on his head and avenge the
deaths of William and Justine.  Our house was the house of mourning. My
father's health was deeply shaken by the horror of the recent events.
Elizabeth was sad and desponding; she no longer took delight in her
ordinary occupations; all pleasure seemed to her sacrilege toward the
dead; eternal woe and tears she then thought was the just tribute she
should pay to innocence so blasted and destroyed.  She was no longer
that happy creature who in earlier youth wandered with me on the banks
of the lake and talked with ecstasy of our future prospects.  The first
of those sorrows which are sent to wean us from the earth had visited
her, and its dimming influence quenched her dearest smiles.

"When I reflect, my dear cousin," said she, "on the miserable death of
Justine Moritz, I no longer see the world and its works as they before
appeared to me.  Before, I looked upon the accounts of vice and
injustice that I read in books or heard from others as tales of ancient
days or imaginary evils; at least they were remote and more familiar to
reason than to the imagination; but now misery has come home, and men
appear to me as monsters thirsting for each other's blood.  Yet I am
certainly unjust.  Everybody believed that poor girl to be guilty; and
if she could have committed the crime for which she suffered, assuredly
she would have been the most depraved of human creatures.  For the sake
of a few jewels, to have murdered the son of her benefactor and friend,
a child whom she had nursed from its birth, and appeared to love as if
it had been her own!  I could not consent to the death of any human
being, but certainly I should have thought such a creature unfit to
remain in the society of men.  But she was innocent.  I know, I feel
she was innocent; you are of the same opinion, and that confirms me.
Alas!  Victor, when falsehood can look so like the truth, who can
assure themselves of certain happiness?  I feel as if I were walking on
the edge of a precipice, towards which thousands are crowding and
endeavouring to plunge me into the abyss.  William and Justine were
assassinated, and the murderer escapes; he walks about the world free,
and perhaps respected.  But even if I were condemned to suffer on the
scaffold for the same crimes, I would not change places with such a
wretch."

I listened to this discourse with the extremest agony.  I, not in deed,
but in effect, was the true murderer.  Elizabeth read my anguish in my
countenance, and kindly taking my hand, said, "My dearest friend, you
must calm yourself.  These events have affected me, God knows how
deeply; but I am not so wretched as you are.  There is an expression of
despair, and sometimes of revenge, in your countenance that makes me
tremble.  Dear Victor, banish these dark passions.  Remember the
friends around you, who centre all their hopes in you.  Have we lost
the power of rendering you happy?  Ah!  While we love, while we are
true to each other, here in this land of peace and beauty, your native
country, we may reap every tranquil blessing--what can disturb our
peace?"

And could not such words from her whom I fondly prized before every
other gift of fortune suffice to chase away the fiend that lurked in my
heart?  Even as she spoke I drew near to her, as if in terror, lest at
that very moment the destroyer had been near to rob me of her.

Thus not the tenderness of friendship, nor the beauty of earth, nor of
heaven, could redeem my soul from woe; the very accents of love were
ineffectual.  I was encompassed by a cloud which no beneficial
influence could penetrate.  The wounded deer dragging its fainting
limbs to some untrodden brake, there to gaze upon the arrow which had
pierced it, and to die, was but a type of me.

Sometimes I could cope with the sullen despair that overwhelmed me, but
sometimes the whirlwind passions of my soul drove me to seek, by bodily
exercise and by change of place, some relief from my intolerable
sensations.  It was during an access of this kind that I suddenly left
my home, and bending my steps towards the near Alpine valleys, sought
in the magnificence, the eternity of such scenes, to forget myself and
my ephemeral, because human, sorrows.  My wanderings were directed
towards the valley of Chamounix.  I had visited it frequently during my
boyhood.  Six years had passed since then:  _I_ was a wreck, but nought
had changed in those savage and enduring scenes.

I performed the first part of my journey on horseback.  I afterwards
hired a mule, as the more sure-footed and least liable to receive
injury on these rugged roads.  The weather was fine; it was about the
middle of the month of August, nearly two months after the death of
Justine, that miserable epoch from which I dated all my woe.  The
weight upon my spirit was sensibly lightened as I plunged yet deeper in
the ravine of Arve.  The immense mountains and precipices that overhung
me on every side, the sound of the river raging among the rocks, and
the dashing of the waterfalls around spoke of a power mighty as
Omnipotence--and I ceased to fear or to bend before any being less
almighty than that which had created and ruled the elements, here
displayed in their most terrific guise.  Still, as I ascended higher,
the valley assumed a more magnificent and astonishing character.
Ruined castles hanging on the precipices of piny mountains, the
impetuous Arve, and cottages every here and there peeping forth from
among the trees formed a scene of singular beauty.  But it was
augmented and rendered sublime by the mighty Alps, whose white and
shining pyramids and domes towered above all, as belonging to another
earth, the habitations of another race of beings.

I passed the bridge of Pelissier, where the ravine, which the river
forms, opened before me, and I began to ascend the mountain that
overhangs it.  Soon after, I entered the valley of Chamounix.  This
valley is more wonderful and sublime, but not so beautiful and
picturesque as that of Servox, through which I had just passed.  The
high and snowy mountains were its immediate boundaries, but I saw no
more ruined castles and fertile fields.  Immense glaciers approached
the road; I heard the rumbling thunder of the falling avalanche and
marked the smoke of its passage.  Mont Blanc, the supreme and
magnificent Mont Blanc, raised itself from the surrounding aiguilles,
and its tremendous dome overlooked the valley.

A tingling long-lost sense of pleasure often came across me during this
journey.  Some turn in the road, some new object suddenly perceived and
recognized, reminded me of days gone by, and were associated with the
lighthearted gaiety of boyhood.  The very winds whispered in soothing
accents, and maternal Nature bade me weep no more.  Then again the
kindly influence ceased to act--I found myself fettered again to grief
and indulging in all the misery of reflection.  Then I spurred on my
animal, striving so to forget the world, my fears, and more than all,
myself--or, in a more desperate fashion, I alighted and threw myself on
the grass, weighed down by horror and despair.

At length I arrived at the village of Chamounix.  Exhaustion succeeded
to the extreme fatigue both of body and of mind which I had endured.
For a short space of time I remained at the window watching the pallid
lightnings that played above Mont Blanc and listening to the rushing of
the Arve, which pursued its noisy way beneath.  The same lulling sounds
acted as a lullaby to my too keen sensations; when I placed my head
upon my pillow, sleep crept over me; I felt it as it came and blessed
the giver of oblivion.



Chapter 10

I spent the following day roaming through the valley.  I stood beside
the sources of the Arveiron, which take their rise in a glacier, that
with slow pace is advancing down from the summit of the hills to
barricade the valley.  The abrupt sides of vast mountains were before
me; the icy wall of the glacier overhung me; a few shattered pines were
scattered around; and the solemn silence of this glorious
presence-chamber of imperial nature was broken only by the brawling
waves or the fall of some vast fragment, the thunder sound of the
avalanche or the cracking, reverberated along the mountains, of the
accumulated ice, which, through the silent working of immutable laws,
was ever and anon rent and torn, as if it had been but a plaything in
their hands.  These sublime and magnificent scenes afforded me the
greatest consolation that I was capable of receiving.  They elevated me
from all littleness of feeling, and although they did not remove my
grief, they subdued and tranquillized it.  In some degree, also, they
diverted my mind from the thoughts over which it had brooded for the
last month.  I retired to rest at night; my slumbers, as it were,
waited on and ministered to by the assemblance of grand shapes which I
had contemplated during the day.  They congregated round me; the
unstained snowy mountain-top, the glittering pinnacle, the pine woods,
and ragged bare ravine, the eagle, soaring amidst the clouds--they all
gathered round me and bade me be at peace.

Where had they fled when the next morning I awoke?  All of
soul-inspiriting fled with sleep, and dark melancholy clouded every
thought.  The rain was pouring in torrents, and thick mists hid the
summits of the mountains, so that I even saw not the faces of those
mighty friends.  Still I would penetrate their misty veil and seek them
in their cloudy retreats.  What were rain and storm to me?  My mule was
brought to the door, and I resolved to ascend to the summit of
Montanvert.  I remembered the effect that the view of the tremendous
and ever-moving glacier had produced upon my mind when I first saw it.
It had then filled me with a sublime ecstasy that gave wings to the
soul and allowed it to soar from the obscure world to light and joy.
The sight of the awful and majestic in nature had indeed always the
effect of solemnizing my mind and causing me to forget the passing
cares of life.  I determined to go without a guide, for I was well
acquainted with the path, and the presence of another would destroy the
solitary grandeur of the scene.

The ascent is precipitous, but the path is cut into continual and short
windings, which enable you to surmount the perpendicularity of the
mountain.  It is a scene terrifically desolate.  In a thousand spots
the traces of the winter avalanche may be perceived, where trees lie
broken and strewed on the ground, some entirely destroyed, others bent,
leaning upon the jutting rocks of the mountain or transversely upon
other trees.  The path, as you ascend higher, is intersected by ravines
of snow, down which stones continually roll from above; one of them is
particularly dangerous, as the slightest sound, such as even speaking
in a loud voice, produces a concussion of air sufficient to draw
destruction upon the head of the speaker.  The pines are not tall or
luxuriant, but they are sombre and add an air of severity to the scene.
I looked on the valley beneath; vast mists were rising from the rivers
which ran through it and curling in thick wreaths around the opposite
mountains, whose summits were hid in the uniform clouds, while rain
poured from the dark sky and added to the melancholy impression I
received from the objects around me.  Alas!  Why does man boast of
sensibilities superior to those apparent in the brute; it only renders
them more necessary beings.  If our impulses were confined to hunger,
thirst, and desire, we might be nearly free; but now we are moved by
every wind that blows and a chance word or scene that that word may
convey to us.


  We rest; a dream has power to poison sleep.
   We rise; one wand'ring thought pollutes the day.
  We feel, conceive, or reason; laugh or weep,
   Embrace fond woe, or cast our cares away;
  It is the same:  for, be it joy or sorrow,
   The path of its departure still is free.
  Man's yesterday may ne'er be like his morrow;
   Nought may endure but mutability!


It was nearly noon when I arrived at the top of the ascent.  For some
time I sat upon the rock that overlooks the sea of ice.  A mist covered
both that and the surrounding mountains.  Presently a breeze dissipated
the cloud, and I descended upon the glacier.  The surface is very
uneven, rising like the waves of a troubled sea, descending low, and
interspersed by rifts that sink deep.  The field of ice is almost a
league in width, but I spent nearly two hours in crossing it.  The
opposite mountain is a bare perpendicular rock.  From the side where I
now stood Montanvert was exactly opposite, at the distance of a league;
and above it rose Mont Blanc, in awful majesty.  I remained in a recess
of the rock, gazing on this wonderful and stupendous scene.  The sea,
or rather the vast river of ice, wound among its dependent mountains,
whose aerial summits hung over its recesses.  Their icy and glittering
peaks shone in the sunlight over the clouds.  My heart, which was
before sorrowful, now swelled with something like joy; I exclaimed,
"Wandering spirits, if indeed ye wander, and do not rest in your narrow
beds, allow me this faint happiness, or take me, as your companion,
away from the joys of life."

As I said this I suddenly beheld the figure of a man, at some distance,
advancing towards me with superhuman speed.  He bounded over the
crevices in the ice, among which I had walked with caution; his
stature, also, as he approached, seemed to exceed that of man.  I was
troubled; a mist came over my eyes, and I felt a faintness seize me,
but I was quickly restored by the cold gale of the mountains.  I
perceived, as the shape came nearer (sight tremendous and abhorred!)
that it was the wretch whom I had created.  I trembled with rage and
horror, resolving to wait his approach and then close with him in
mortal combat.  He approached; his countenance bespoke bitter anguish,
combined with disdain and malignity, while its unearthly ugliness
rendered it almost too horrible for human eyes.  But I scarcely
observed this; rage and hatred had at first deprived me of utterance,
and I recovered only to overwhelm him with words expressive of furious
detestation and contempt.

"Devil," I exclaimed, "do you dare approach me?  And do not you fear
the fierce vengeance of my arm wreaked on your miserable head?  Begone,
vile insect!  Or rather, stay, that I may trample you to dust!  And,
oh!  That I could, with the extinction of your miserable existence,
restore those victims whom you have so diabolically murdered!"

"I expected this reception," said the daemon.  "All men hate the
wretched; how, then, must I be hated, who am miserable beyond all
living things!  Yet you, my creator, detest and spurn me, thy creature,
to whom thou art bound by ties only dissoluble by the annihilation of
one of us.  You purpose to kill me.  How dare you sport thus with life?
Do your duty towards me, and I will do mine towards you and the rest of
mankind.  If you will comply with my conditions, I will leave them and
you at peace; but if you refuse, I will glut the maw of death, until it
be satiated with the blood of your remaining friends."

"Abhorred monster!  Fiend that thou art!  The tortures of hell are too
mild a vengeance for thy crimes.  Wretched devil!  You reproach me with
your creation, come on, then, that I may extinguish the spark which I
so negligently bestowed."

My rage was without bounds; I sprang on him, impelled by all the
feelings which can arm one being against the existence of another.

He easily eluded me and said,

"Be calm!  I entreat you to hear me before you give vent to your hatred
on my devoted head.  Have I not suffered enough, that you seek to
increase my misery?  Life, although it may only be an accumulation of
anguish, is dear to me, and I will defend it.  Remember, thou hast made
me more powerful than thyself; my height is superior to thine, my
joints more supple.  But I will not be tempted to set myself in
opposition to thee.  I am thy creature, and I will be even mild and
docile to my natural lord and king if thou wilt also perform thy part,
the which thou owest me.  Oh, Frankenstein, be not equitable to every
other and trample upon me alone, to whom thy justice, and even thy
clemency and affection, is most due.  Remember that I am thy creature;
I ought to be thy Adam, but I am rather the fallen angel, whom thou
drivest from joy for no misdeed.  Everywhere I see bliss, from which I
alone am irrevocably excluded.  I was benevolent and good; misery made
me a fiend.  Make me happy, and I shall again be virtuous."

"Begone!  I will not hear you.  There can be no community between you
and me; we are enemies.  Begone, or let us try our strength in a fight,
in which one must fall."

"How can I move thee?  Will no entreaties cause thee to turn a
favourable eye upon thy creature, who implores thy goodness and
compassion?  Believe me, Frankenstein, I was benevolent; my soul glowed
with love and humanity; but am I not alone, miserably alone?  You, my
creator, abhor me; what hope can I gather from your fellow creatures,
who owe me nothing?  They spurn and hate me.  The desert mountains and
dreary glaciers are my refuge.  I have wandered here many days; the
caves of ice, which I only do not fear, are a dwelling to me, and the
only one which man does not grudge.  These bleak skies I hail, for they
are kinder to me than your fellow beings.  If the multitude of mankind
knew of my existence, they would do as you do, and arm themselves for
my destruction.  Shall I not then hate them who abhor me?  I will keep
no terms with my enemies.  I am miserable, and they shall share my
wretchedness.  Yet it is in your power to recompense me, and deliver
them from an evil which it only remains for you to make so great, that
not only you and your family, but thousands of others, shall be
swallowed up in the whirlwinds of its rage.  Let your compassion be
moved, and do not disdain me.  Listen to my tale; when you have heard
that, abandon or commiserate me, as you shall judge that I deserve.
But hear me.  The guilty are allowed, by human laws, bloody as they
are, to speak in their own defence before they are condemned.  Listen
to me, Frankenstein.  You accuse me of murder, and yet you would, with
a satisfied conscience, destroy your own creature.  Oh, praise the
eternal justice of man!  Yet I ask you not to spare me; listen to me,
and then, if you can, and if you will, destroy the work of your hands."

"Why do you call to my remembrance," I rejoined, "circumstances of
which I shudder to reflect, that I have been the miserable origin and
author?  Cursed be the day, abhorred devil, in which you first saw
light!  Cursed (although I curse myself) be the hands that formed you!
You have made me wretched beyond expression.  You have left me no power
to consider whether I am just to you or not.  Begone!  Relieve me from
the sight of your detested form."

"Thus I relieve thee, my creator," he said, and placed his hated hands
before my eyes, which I flung from me with violence; "thus I take from
thee a sight which you abhor.  Still thou canst listen to me and grant
me thy compassion.  By the virtues that I once possessed, I demand this
from you.  Hear my tale; it is long and strange, and the temperature of
this place is not fitting to your fine sensations; come to the hut upon
the mountain.  The sun is yet high in the heavens; before it descends
to hide itself behind your snowy precipices and illuminate another
world, you will have heard my story and can decide.  On you it rests,
whether I quit forever the neighbourhood of man and lead a harmless
life, or become the scourge of your fellow creatures and the author of
your own speedy ruin."

As he said this he led the way across the ice; I followed.  My heart
was full, and I did not answer him, but as I proceeded, I weighed the
various arguments that he had used and determined at least to listen to
his tale.  I was partly urged by curiosity, and compassion confirmed my
resolution.  I had hitherto supposed him to be the murderer of my
brother, and I eagerly sought a confirmation or denial of this opinion.
For the first time, also, I felt what the duties of a creator towards
his creature were, and that I ought to render him happy before I
complained of his wickedness.  These motives urged me to comply with
his demand.  We crossed the ice, therefore, and ascended the opposite
rock.  The air was cold, and the rain again began to descend; we
entered the hut, the fiend with an air of exultation, I with a heavy
heart and depressed spirits.  But I consented to listen, and seating
myself by the fire which my odious companion had lighted, he thus began
