smiles of consolation.  But it was all a dream; no Eve soothed my
sorrows nor shared my thoughts; I was alone.  I remembered Adam's
supplication to his Creator.  But where was mine?  He had abandoned me,
and in the bitterness of my heart I cursed him.

"Autumn passed thus.  I saw, with surprise and grief, the leaves decay
and fall, and nature again assume the barren and bleak appearance it
had worn when I first beheld the woods and the lovely moon.  Yet I did
not heed the bleakness of the weather; I was better fitted by my
conformation for the endurance of cold than heat.  But my chief
delights were the sight of the flowers, the birds, and all the gay
apparel of summer; when those deserted me, I turned with more attention
towards the cottagers.  Their happiness was not decreased by the
absence of summer.  They loved and sympathized with one another; and
their joys, depending on each other, were not interrupted by the
casualties that took place around them.  The more I saw of them, the
greater became my desire to claim their protection and kindness; my
heart yearned to be known and loved by these amiable creatures; to see
their sweet looks directed towards me with affection was the utmost
limit of my ambition.  I dared not think that they would turn them from
me with disdain and horror.  The poor that stopped at their door were
never driven away.  I asked, it is true, for greater treasures than a
little food or rest:  I required kindness and sympathy; but I did not
believe myself utterly unworthy of it.

"The winter advanced, and an entire revolution of the seasons had taken
place since I awoke into life.  My attention at this time was solely
directed towards my plan of introducing myself into the cottage of my
protectors.  I revolved many projects, but that on which I finally
fixed was to enter the dwelling when the blind old man should be alone.
I had sagacity enough to discover that the unnatural hideousness of my
person was the chief object of horror with those who had formerly
beheld me.  My voice, although harsh, had nothing terrible in it; I
thought, therefore, that if in the absence of his children I could gain
the good will and mediation of the old De Lacey, I might by his means
be tolerated by my younger protectors.

"One day, when the sun shone on the red leaves that strewed the ground
and diffused cheerfulness, although it denied warmth, Safie, Agatha,
and Felix departed on a long country walk, and the old man, at his own
desire, was left alone in the cottage.  When his children had departed,
he took up his guitar and played several mournful but sweet airs, more
sweet and mournful than I had ever heard him play before.  At first his
countenance was illuminated with pleasure, but as he continued,
thoughtfulness and sadness succeeded; at length, laying aside the
instrument, he sat absorbed in reflection.

"My heart beat quick; this was the hour and moment of trial, which
would decide my hopes or realize my fears.  The servants were gone to a
neighbouring fair.  All was silent in and around the cottage; it was an
excellent opportunity; yet, when I proceeded to execute my plan, my
limbs failed me and I sank to the ground.  Again I rose, and exerting
all the firmness of which I was master, removed the planks which I had
placed before my hovel to conceal my retreat.  The fresh air revived
me, and with renewed determination I approached the door of their
cottage.

"I knocked.  'Who is there?' said the old man.  'Come in.'

"I entered.  'Pardon this intrusion,' said I; 'I am a traveller in want
of a little rest; you would greatly oblige me if you would allow me to
remain a few minutes before the fire.'

"'Enter,' said De Lacey, 'and I will try in what manner I can to
relieve your wants; but, unfortunately, my children are from home, and
as I am blind, I am afraid I shall find it difficult to procure food
for you.'

"'Do not trouble yourself, my kind host; I have food; it is warmth and
rest only that I need.'

"I sat down, and a silence ensued.  I knew that every minute was
precious to me, yet I remained irresolute in what manner to commence
the interview, when the old man addressed me.  'By your language,
stranger, I suppose you are my countryman; are you French?'

"'No; but I was educated by a French family and understand that
language only.  I am now going to claim the protection of some friends,
whom I sincerely love, and of whose favour I have some hopes.'

"'Are they Germans?'

"'No, they are French.  But let us change the subject.  I am an
unfortunate and deserted creature, I look around and I have no relation
or friend upon earth.  These amiable people to whom I go have never
seen me and know little of me.  I am full of fears, for if I fail
there, I am an outcast in the world forever.'

"'Do not despair.  To be friendless is indeed to be unfortunate, but
the hearts of men, when unprejudiced by any obvious self-interest, are
full of brotherly love and charity.  Rely, therefore, on your hopes;
and if these friends are good and amiable, do not despair.'

"'They are kind--they are the most excellent creatures in the world;
but, unfortunately, they are prejudiced against me.  I have good
dispositions; my life has been hitherto harmless and in some degree
beneficial; but a fatal prejudice clouds their eyes, and where they
ought to see a feeling and kind friend, they behold only a detestable
monster.'

"'That is indeed unfortunate; but if you are really blameless, cannot
you undeceive them?'

"'I am about to undertake that task; and it is on that account that I
feel so many overwhelming terrors.  I tenderly love these friends; I
have, unknown to them, been for many months in the habits of daily
kindness towards them; but they believe that I wish to injure them, and
it is that prejudice which I wish to overcome.'

"'Where do these friends reside?'

"'Near this spot.'

"The old man paused and then continued, 'If you will unreservedly
confide to me the particulars of your tale, I perhaps may be of use in
undeceiving them.  I am blind and cannot judge of your countenance, but
there is something in your words which persuades me that you are
sincere.  I am poor and an exile, but it will afford me true pleasure
to be in any way serviceable to a human creature.'

"'Excellent man!  I thank you and accept your generous offer.  You
raise me from the dust by this kindness; and I trust that, by your aid,
I shall not be driven from the society and sympathy of your fellow
creatures.'

"'Heaven forbid!  Even if you were really criminal, for that can only
drive you to desperation, and not instigate you to virtue.  I also am
unfortunate; I and my family have been condemned, although innocent;
judge, therefore, if I do not feel for your misfortunes.'

"'How can I thank you, my best and only benefactor?  From your lips
first have I heard the voice of kindness directed towards me; I shall
be forever grateful; and your present humanity assures me of success
with those friends whom I am on the point of meeting.'

"'May I know the names and residence of those friends?'

"I paused. This, I thought, was the moment of decision, which was to
rob me of or bestow happiness on me forever.  I struggled vainly for
firmness sufficient to answer him, but the effort destroyed all my
remaining strength; I sank on the chair and sobbed aloud.  At that
moment I heard the steps of my younger protectors.  I had not a moment
to lose, but seizing the hand of the old man, I cried, 'Now is the
time!  Save and protect me!  You and your family are the friends whom I
seek.  Do not you desert me in the hour of trial!'

"'Great God!' exclaimed the old man.  'Who are you?'

"At that instant the cottage door was opened, and Felix, Safie, and
Agatha entered.  Who can describe their horror and consternation on
beholding me?  Agatha fainted, and Safie, unable to attend to her
friend, rushed out of the cottage.  Felix darted forward, and with
supernatural force tore me from his father, to whose knees I clung, in
a transport of fury, he dashed me to the ground and struck me violently
with a stick.  I could have torn him limb from limb, as the lion rends
the antelope.  But my heart sank within me as with bitter sickness, and
I refrained.  I saw him on the point of repeating his blow, when,
overcome by pain and anguish, I quitted the cottage, and in the general
tumult escaped unperceived to my hovel."



Chapter 16

"Cursed, cursed creator!  Why did I live?  Why, in that instant, did I
not extinguish the spark of existence which you had so wantonly
bestowed?  I know not; despair had not yet taken possession of me; my
feelings were those of rage and revenge.  I could with pleasure have
destroyed the cottage and its inhabitants and have glutted myself with
their shrieks and misery.

"When night came I quitted my retreat and wandered in the wood; and
now, no longer restrained by the fear of discovery, I gave vent to my
anguish in fearful howlings.  I was like a wild beast that had broken
the toils, destroying the objects that obstructed me and ranging
through the wood with a stag-like swiftness.  Oh!  What a miserable
night I passed!  The cold stars shone in mockery, and the bare trees
waved their branches above me; now and then the sweet voice of a bird
burst forth amidst the universal stillness.  All, save I, were at rest
or in enjoyment; I, like the arch-fiend, bore a hell within me, and
finding myself unsympathized with, wished to tear up the trees, spread
havoc and destruction around me, and then to have sat down and enjoyed
the ruin.

"But this was a luxury of sensation that could not endure; I became
fatigued with excess of bodily exertion and sank on the damp grass in
the sick impotence of despair.  There was none among the myriads of men
that existed who would pity or assist me; and should I feel kindness
towards my enemies?  No; from that moment I declared everlasting war
against the species, and more than all, against him who had formed me
and sent me forth to this insupportable misery.

"The sun rose; I heard the voices of men and knew that it was
impossible to return to my retreat during that day.  Accordingly I hid
myself in some thick underwood, determining to devote the ensuing hours
to reflection on my situation.

"The pleasant sunshine and the pure air of day restored me to some
degree of tranquillity; and when I considered what had passed at the
cottage, I could not help believing that I had been too hasty in my
conclusions.  I had certainly acted imprudently.  It was apparent that
my conversation had interested the father in my behalf, and  I was a
fool in having exposed my person to the horror of his children.  I
ought to have familiarized the old De Lacey to me, and by degrees to
have discovered myself to the rest of his family, when they should have
been  prepared for my approach.  But I did not believe my errors to be
irretrievable, and after much consideration I resolved to return to the
cottage, seek the old man, and by my representations win him to my
party.

"These thoughts calmed me, and in the afternoon I sank into a profound
sleep; but the fever of my blood did not allow me to be visited by
peaceful dreams.  The horrible scene of the preceding day was forever
acting before my eyes; the females were flying and the enraged Felix
tearing me from his father's feet.  I awoke exhausted, and finding that
it was already night, I crept forth from my hiding-place, and went in
search of food.

"When my hunger was appeased, I directed my steps towards the
well-known path that conducted to the cottage.  All there was at peace.
I crept into my hovel and remained in silent expectation of the
accustomed hour when the family arose.  That hour passed, the sun
mounted high in the heavens, but the cottagers did not appear.  I
trembled violently, apprehending some dreadful misfortune.  The inside
of the cottage was dark, and I heard no motion; I cannot describe the
agony of this suspense.

"Presently two countrymen passed by, but pausing near the cottage, they
entered into conversation, using violent gesticulations; but I did not
understand what they said, as they spoke the language of the country,
which differed from that of my protectors.  Soon after, however, Felix
approached with another man; I was surprised, as I knew that he had not
quitted the cottage that morning, and waited anxiously to discover from
his discourse the meaning of these unusual appearances.

"'Do you consider,' said his companion to him, 'that you will be
obliged to pay three months' rent and to lose the produce of your
garden?  I do not wish to take any unfair advantage, and I beg
therefore that you will take some days to consider of your
determination.'

"'It is utterly useless,' replied Felix; 'we can never again inhabit
your cottage.  The life of my father is in the greatest danger, owing
to the dreadful circumstance that I have related.  My wife and my
sister will never recover from their horror.  I entreat you not to
reason with me any more.  Take possession of your tenement and let me
fly from this place.'

"Felix trembled violently as he said this.  He and his companion
entered the cottage, in which they remained for a few minutes, and then
departed.  I never saw any of the family of De Lacey more.

"I continued for the remainder of the day in my hovel in a state of
utter and stupid despair.  My protectors had departed and had broken
the only link that held me to the world.  For the first time the
feelings of revenge and hatred filled my bosom, and I did not strive to
control them, but allowing myself to be borne away by the stream, I
bent my mind towards injury and death.  When I thought of my friends,
of the mild voice of De Lacey, the gentle eyes of Agatha, and the
exquisite beauty of the Arabian, these thoughts vanished and a gush of
tears somewhat soothed me.  But again when I reflected that they had
spurned and deserted me, anger returned, a rage of anger, and unable to
injure anything human, I turned my fury towards inanimate objects.  As
night advanced I placed a variety of combustibles around the cottage,
and after having destroyed every vestige of cultivation in the garden,
I waited with forced impatience until the moon had sunk to commence my
operations.

"As the night advanced, a fierce wind arose from the woods and quickly
dispersed the clouds that had loitered in the heavens; the blast tore
along like a mighty avalanche and produced a kind of insanity in my
spirits that burst all bounds of reason and reflection.  I lighted the
dry branch of a tree and danced with fury around the devoted cottage,
my eyes still fixed on the western horizon, the edge of which the moon
nearly touched.  A part of its orb was at length hid, and I waved my
brand; it sank, and with a loud scream I fired the straw, and heath,
and bushes, which I had collected.  The wind fanned the fire, and the
cottage was quickly enveloped by the flames, which clung to it and
licked it with their forked and destroying tongues.

"As soon as I was convinced that no assistance could save any part of
the habitation, I quitted the scene and sought for refuge in the woods.

"And now, with the world before me, whither should I bend my steps?  I
resolved to fly far from the scene of my misfortunes; but to me, hated
and despised, every country must be equally horrible.  At length the
thought of you crossed my mind.  I learned from your papers that you
were my father, my creator; and to whom could I apply with more fitness
than to him who had given me life?  Among the lessons that Felix had
bestowed upon Safie, geography had not been omitted; I had learned from
these the relative situations of the different countries of the earth.
You had mentioned Geneva as the name of your native town, and towards
this place I resolved to proceed.

"But how was I to direct myself?  I knew that I must travel in a
southwesterly direction to reach my destination, but the sun was my
only guide.  I did not know the names of the towns that I was to pass
through, nor could I ask information from a single human being; but I
did not despair.  From you only could I hope for succour, although
towards you I felt no sentiment but that of hatred.  Unfeeling,
heartless creator!  You had endowed me with perceptions and passions
and then cast me abroad an object for the scorn and horror of mankind.
But on you only had I any claim for pity and redress, and from you I
determined to seek that justice which I vainly attempted to gain from
any other being that wore the human form.

"My travels were long and the sufferings I endured intense.  It was
late in autumn when I quitted the district where I had so long resided.
I travelled only at night, fearful of encountering the visage of a
human being.  Nature decayed around me, and the sun became heatless;
rain and snow poured around me; mighty rivers were frozen; the surface
of the earth was hard and chill, and bare, and I found no shelter.  Oh,
earth!  How often did I imprecate curses on the cause of my being!  The
mildness of my nature had fled, and all within me was turned to gall
and bitterness.  The nearer I approached to your habitation, the more
deeply did I feel the spirit of revenge enkindled in my heart.  Snow
fell, and the waters were hardened, but I rested not.  A few incidents
now and then directed me, and I possessed a map of the country; but I
often wandered wide from my path.  The agony of my feelings allowed me
no respite; no incident occurred from which my rage and misery could
not extract its food; but a circumstance that happened when I arrived
on the confines of Switzerland, when the sun had recovered its warmth
and the earth again began to look green, confirmed in an especial
manner the bitterness and horror of my feelings.

"I generally rested during the day and travelled only when I was
secured by night from the view of man.  One morning, however, finding
that my path lay through a deep wood, I ventured to continue my journey
after the sun had risen; the day, which was one of the first of spring,
cheered even me by the loveliness of its sunshine and the balminess of
the air.  I felt emotions of gentleness and pleasure, that had long
appeared dead, revive within me.  Half surprised by the novelty of
these sensations, I allowed myself to be borne away by them, and
forgetting my solitude and deformity, dared to be happy.  Soft tears
again bedewed my cheeks, and I even raised my humid eyes with
thankfulness towards the blessed sun, which bestowed such joy upon me.

"I continued to wind among the paths of the wood, until I came to its
boundary, which was skirted by a deep and rapid river, into which many
of the trees bent their branches, now budding with the fresh spring.
Here I paused, not exactly knowing what path to pursue, when I heard
the sound of voices, that induced me to conceal myself under the shade
of a cypress.  I was scarcely hid when a young girl came running
towards the spot where I was concealed, laughing, as if she ran from
someone in sport.  She continued her course along the precipitous sides
of the river, when suddenly her foot slipped, and she fell into the
rapid stream.  I rushed from my hiding-place and with extreme labour,
from the force of the current, saved her and dragged her to shore.  She
was senseless, and I endeavoured by every means in my power to restore
animation, when I was suddenly interrupted by the approach of a rustic,
who was probably the person from whom she had playfully fled.  On
seeing me, he darted towards me, and tearing the girl from my arms,
hastened towards the deeper parts of the wood.  I followed speedily, I
hardly knew why; but when the man saw me draw near, he aimed a gun,
which he carried, at my body and fired.  I sank to the ground, and my
injurer, with increased swiftness, escaped into the wood.

"This was then the reward of my benevolence!  I had saved a human being
from destruction, and as a recompense I now writhed under the miserable
pain of a wound which shattered the flesh and bone.  The feelings of
kindness and gentleness which I had entertained but a few moments
before gave place to hellish rage and gnashing of teeth.  Inflamed by
pain, I vowed eternal hatred and vengeance to all mankind.  But the
agony of my wound overcame me; my pulses paused, and I fainted.

"For some weeks I led a miserable life in the woods, endeavouring to
cure the wound which I had received.  The ball had entered my shoulder,
and I knew not whether it had remained there or passed through; at any
rate I had no means of extracting it.  My sufferings were augmented
also by the oppressive sense of the injustice and ingratitude of their
infliction.  My daily vows rose for revenge--a deep and deadly revenge,
such as would alone compensate for the outrages and anguish I had
endured.

"After some weeks my wound healed, and I continued my journey.  The
labours I endured were no longer to be alleviated by the bright sun or
gentle breezes of spring; all joy was but a mockery which insulted my
desolate state and made me feel more painfully that I was not made for
the enjoyment of pleasure.

"But my toils now drew near a close, and in two months from this time I
reached the environs of Geneva.

"It was evening when I arrived, and I retired to a hiding-place among
the fields that surround it to meditate in what manner I should apply
to you.  I was oppressed by fatigue and hunger and far too unhappy to
enjoy the gentle breezes of evening or the prospect of the sun setting
behind the stupendous mountains of Jura.

"At this time a slight sleep relieved me from the pain of reflection,
which was disturbed by the approach of a beautiful child, who came
running into the recess I had chosen, with all the sportiveness of
infancy.  Suddenly, as I gazed on him, an idea seized me that this
little creature was unprejudiced and had lived too short a time to have
imbibed a horror of deformity.  If, therefore, I could seize him and
educate him as my companion and friend, I should not be so desolate in
this peopled earth.

"Urged by this impulse, I seized on the boy as he passed and drew him
towards me.  As soon as he beheld my form, he placed his hands before
his eyes and uttered a shrill scream; I drew his hand forcibly from his
face and said, 'Child, what is the meaning of this?  I do not intend to
hurt you; listen to me.'

"He struggled violently.  'Let me go,' he cried; 'monster!  Ugly
wretch!  You wish to eat me and tear me to pieces.  You are an ogre.
Let me go, or I will tell my papa.'

"'Boy, you will never see your father again; you must come with me.'

"'Hideous monster!  Let me go.  My papa is a syndic--he is M.
Frankenstein--he will punish you.  You dare not keep me.'

"'Frankenstein! you belong then to my enemy--to him towards whom I have
sworn eternal revenge; you shall be my first victim.'

"The child still struggled and loaded me with epithets which carried
despair to my heart; I grasped his throat to silence him, and in a
moment he lay dead at my feet.

"I gazed on my victim, and my heart swelled with exultation and hellish
triumph; clapping my hands, I exclaimed, 'I too can create desolation;
my enemy is not invulnerable; this death will carry despair to him, and
a thousand other miseries shall torment and destroy him.'

"As I fixed my eyes on the child, I saw something glittering on his
breast.  I took it; it was a portrait of a most lovely woman.  In spite
of my malignity, it softened and attracted me.  For a few moments I
gazed with delight on her dark eyes, fringed by deep lashes, and her
lovely lips; but presently my rage returned; I remembered that I was
forever deprived of the delights that such beautiful creatures could
bestow and that she whose resemblance I contemplated would, in
regarding me, have changed that air of divine benignity to one
expressive of disgust and affright.

"Can you wonder that such thoughts transported me with rage?  I only
wonder that at that moment, instead of venting my sensations in
exclamations and agony, I did not rush among mankind and perish in the
attempt to destroy them.

"While I was overcome by these feelings, I left the spot where I had
committed the murder, and seeking a more secluded hiding-place, I
entered a barn which had appeared to me to be empty.  A woman was
sleeping on some straw; she was young, not indeed so beautiful as her
whose portrait I held, but of an agreeable aspect and blooming in the
loveliness of youth and health.  Here, I thought, is one of those whose
joy-imparting smiles are bestowed on all but me.  And then I bent over
her and whispered, 'Awake, fairest, thy lover is near--he who would
give his life but to obtain one look of affection from thine eyes; my
beloved, awake!'

"The sleeper stirred; a thrill of terror ran through me.  Should she
indeed awake, and see me, and curse me, and denounce the murderer? Thus
would she assuredly act if her darkened eyes opened and she beheld me.
The thought was madness; it stirred the fiend within me--not I, but
she, shall suffer; the murder I have committed because I am forever
robbed of all that she could give me, she shall atone.  The crime had
its source in her; be hers the punishment!  Thanks to the lessons of
Felix and the sanguinary laws of man, I had learned now to work
mischief.  I bent over her and placed the portrait securely in one of
the folds of her dress.  She moved again, and I fled.

"For some days I haunted the spot where these scenes had taken place,
sometimes wishing to see you, sometimes resolved to quit the world and
its miseries forever.  At length I wandered towards these mountains,
and have ranged through their immense recesses, consumed by a burning
passion which you alone can gratify.  We may not part until you have
promised to comply with my requisition.  I am alone and miserable; man
will not associate with me; but one as deformed and horrible as myself
would not deny herself to me.  My companion must be of the same species
and have the same defects.  This being you must create."



Chapter 17

The being finished speaking and fixed his looks upon me in the
expectation of a reply.  But I was bewildered, perplexed, and unable to
arrange my ideas sufficiently to understand the full extent of his
proposition.  He continued,

"You must create a female for me with whom I can live in the
interchange of those sympathies necessary for my being.  This you alone
can do, and I demand it of you as a right which you must not refuse to
concede."

The latter part of his tale had kindled anew in me the anger that had
died away while he narrated his peaceful life among the cottagers, and
as he said this I could no longer suppress the rage that burned within
me.

"I do refuse it," I replied; "and no torture shall ever extort a
consent from me.  You may render me the most miserable of men, but you
shall never make me base in my own eyes.  Shall I create another like
yourself, whose joint wickedness might desolate the world.  Begone!  I
have answered you; you may torture me, but I will never consent."

"You are in the wrong," replied the fiend; "and instead of threatening,
I am content to reason with you.  I am malicious because I am
miserable.  Am I not shunned and hated by all mankind?  You, my
creator, would tear me to pieces and triumph; remember that, and tell
me why I should pity man more than he pities me?  You would not call it
murder if you could precipitate me into one of those ice-rifts and
destroy my frame, the work of your own hands.  Shall I respect man when
he condemns me?  Let him live with me in the interchange of kindness,
and instead of injury I would bestow every benefit upon him with tears
of gratitude at his acceptance.  But that cannot be; the human senses
are insurmountable barriers to our union.  Yet mine shall not be the
submission of abject slavery.  I will revenge my injuries; if I cannot
inspire love, I will cause fear, and chiefly towards you my arch-enemy,
because my creator, do I swear inextinguishable hatred.  Have a care; I
will work at your destruction, nor finish until I desolate your heart,
so that you shall curse the hour of your birth."

A fiendish rage animated him as he said this; his face was wrinkled
into contortions too horrible for human eyes to behold; but presently
he calmed himself and proceeded--

"I intended to reason.  This passion is detrimental to me, for you do
not reflect that YOU are the cause of its excess.  If any being felt
emotions of benevolence towards me, I should return them a hundred and
a hundredfold; for that one creature's sake I would make peace with the
whole kind!  But I now indulge in dreams of bliss that cannot be
realized.  What I ask of you is reasonable and moderate; I demand a
creature of another sex, but as hideous as myself; the gratification is
small, but it is all that I can receive, and it shall content me.  It
is true, we shall be monsters, cut off from all the world; but on that
account we shall be more attached to one another.  Our lives will not
be happy, but they will be harmless and free from the misery I now
feel.  Oh!  My creator, make me happy; let me feel gratitude towards
you for one benefit!  Let me see that I excite the sympathy of some
existing thing; do not deny me my request!"

I was moved.  I shuddered when I thought of the possible consequences
of my consent, but I felt that there was some justice in his argument.
His tale and the feelings he now expressed proved him to be a creature
of fine sensations, and did I not as his maker owe him all the portion
of happiness that it was in my power to bestow?  He saw my change of
feeling and continued,

"If you consent, neither you nor any other human being shall ever see
us again; I will go to the vast wilds of South America.  My food is not
that of man; I do not destroy the lamb and the kid to glut my appetite;
acorns and berries afford me sufficient nourishment.  My companion will
be of the same nature as myself and will be content with the same fare.
We shall make our bed of dried leaves; the sun will shine on us as on
man and will ripen our food.  The picture I present to you is peaceful
and human, and you must feel that you could deny it only in the
wantonness of power and cruelty.  Pitiless as you have been towards me,
I now see compassion in your eyes; let me seize the favourable moment
and persuade you to promise what I so ardently desire."

"You propose," replied I, "to fly from the habitations of man, to dwell
in those wilds where the beasts of the field will be your only
companions.  How can you, who long for the love and sympathy of man,
persevere in this exile?  You will return and again seek their
kindness, and you will meet with their detestation; your evil passions
will be renewed, and you will then have a companion to aid you in the
task of destruction.  This may not be; cease to argue the point, for I
cannot consent."

"How inconstant are your feelings!  But a moment ago you were moved by
my representations, and why do you again harden yourself to my
complaints?  I swear to you, by the earth which I inhabit, and by you
that made me, that with the companion you bestow I will quit the
neighbourhood of man and dwell, as it may chance, in the most savage of
places.  My evil passions will have fled, for I shall meet with
sympathy!  My life will flow quietly away, and in my dying moments I
shall not curse my maker."

His words had a strange effect upon me.  I compassionated him and
sometimes felt a wish to console him, but when I looked upon him, when
I saw the filthy mass that moved and talked, my heart sickened and my
feelings were altered to those of horror and hatred.  I tried to stifle
these sensations; I thought that as I could not sympathize with him, I
had no right to withhold from him the small portion of happiness which
was yet in my power to bestow.

"You swear," I said, "to be harmless; but have you not already shown a
degree of malice that should reasonably make me distrust you?  May not
even this be a feint that will increase your triumph by affording a
wider scope for your revenge?"

"How is this?  I must not be trifled with, and I demand an answer.  If
I have no ties and no affections, hatred and vice must be my portion;
the love of another will destroy the cause of my crimes, and I shall
become a thing of whose existence everyone will be ignorant.  My vices
are the children of a forced solitude that I abhor, and my virtues will
necessarily arise when I live in communion with an equal.  I shall feel
the affections of a sensitive being and become linked to the chain of
existence and events from which I am now excluded."

I paused some time to reflect on all he had related and the various
arguments which he had employed.  I thought of the promise of virtues
which he had displayed on the opening of his existence and the
subsequent blight of all kindly feeling by the loathing and scorn which
his protectors had manifested towards him.  His power and threats were
not omitted in my calculations; a creature who could exist in the ice
caves of the glaciers and hide himself from pursuit among the ridges of
inaccessible precipices was a being possessing faculties it would be
vain to cope with.  After a long pause of reflection I concluded that
the justice due both to him and my fellow creatures demanded of me that
I should comply with his request.  Turning to him, therefore, I said,

"I consent to your demand, on your solemn oath to quit Europe forever,
and every other place in the neighbourhood of man, as soon as I shall
deliver into your hands a female who will accompany you in your exile."

"I swear," he cried, "by the sun, and by the blue sky of heaven, and by
the fire of love that burns my heart, that if you grant my prayer,
while they exist you shall never behold me again.  Depart to your home
and commence your labours; I shall watch their progress with
unutterable anxiety; and fear not but that when you are ready I shall
appear."

Saying this, he suddenly quitted me, fearful, perhaps, of any change in
my sentiments.  I saw him descend the mountain with greater speed than
the flight of an eagle, and quickly lost among the undulations of the
sea of ice.

His tale had occupied the whole day, and the sun was upon the verge of
the horizon when he departed.  I knew that I ought to hasten my descent
towards the valley, as I should soon be encompassed in darkness; but my
heart was heavy, and my steps slow.  The labour of winding among the
little paths of the mountain and fixing my feet firmly as I advanced
perplexed me, occupied as I was by the emotions which the occurrences
of the day had produced.  Night was far advanced when I came to the
halfway resting-place and seated myself beside the fountain.  The stars
shone at intervals as the clouds passed from over them; the dark pines
rose before me, and every here and there a broken tree lay on the
ground; it was a scene of wonderful solemnity and stirred strange
thoughts within me.  I wept bitterly, and clasping my hands in agony, I
exclaimed, "Oh!  Stars and clouds and winds, ye are all about to mock
me; if ye really pity me, crush sensation and memory; let me become as
nought; but if not, depart, depart, and leave me in darkness."

These were wild and miserable thoughts, but I cannot describe to you
how the eternal twinkling of the stars weighed upon me and how I
listened to every blast of wind as if it were a dull ugly siroc on its
way to consume me.

Morning dawned before I arrived at the village of Chamounix; I took no
rest, but returned immediately to Geneva.  Even in my own heart I could
give no expression to my sensations--they weighed on me with a
mountain's weight and their excess destroyed my agony beneath them.
Thus I returned home, and entering the house, presented myself to the
family.  My haggard and wild appearance awoke intense alarm, but I
answered no question, scarcely did I speak.  I felt as if I were placed
under a ban--as if I had no right to claim their sympathies--as if
never more might I enjoy companionship with them.  Yet even thus I
loved them to adoration; and to save them, I resolved to dedicate
myself to my most abhorred task.  The prospect of such an occupation
made every other circumstance of existence pass before me like a dream,
and that thought only had to me the reality of life.



Chapter 18

Day after day, week after week, passed away on my return to Geneva; and
I could not collect the courage to recommence my work.  I feared the
vengeance of the disappointed fiend, yet I was unable to overcome my
repugnance to the task which was enjoined me.  I found that I could not
compose a female without again devoting several months to profound
study and laborious disquisition.  I had heard of some discoveries
having been made by an English philosopher, the knowledge of which was
material to my success, and I sometimes thought of obtaining my
father's consent to visit England for this purpose; but I clung to
every pretence of delay and shrank from taking the first step in an
undertaking whose immediate necessity began to appear less absolute to
me.  A change indeed had taken place in me; my health, which had
hitherto declined, was now much restored; and my spirits, when
unchecked by the memory of my unhappy promise, rose proportionably.  My
father saw this change with pleasure, and he turned his thoughts
towards the best method of eradicating the remains of my melancholy,
which every now and then would return by fits, and with a devouring
blackness overcast the approaching sunshine.  At these moments I took
refuge in the most perfect solitude.  I passed whole days on the lake
alone in a little boat, watching the clouds and listening to the
rippling of the waves, silent and listless.  But the fresh air and
bright sun seldom failed to restore me to some degree of composure, and
on my return I met the salutations of my friends with a readier smile
and a more cheerful heart.

It was after my return from one of these rambles that my father,
calling me aside, thus addressed me,

"I am happy to remark, my dear son, that you have resumed your former
pleasures and seem to be returning to yourself.  And yet you are still
unhappy and still avoid our society.  For some time I was lost in
conjecture as to the cause of this, but yesterday an idea struck me,
and if it is well founded, I conjure you to avow it.  Reserve on such a
point would be not only useless, but draw down treble misery on us all."

I trembled violently at his exordium, and my father continued--"I
confess, my son, that I have always looked forward to your marriage
with our dear Elizabeth as the tie of our domestic comfort and the stay
of my declining years.  You were attached to each other from your
earliest infancy; you studied together, and appeared, in dispositions
and tastes, entirely suited to one another.  But so blind is the
experience of man that what I conceived to be the best assistants to my
plan may have entirely destroyed it.  You, perhaps, regard her as your
sister, without any wish that she might become your wife.  Nay, you may
have met with another whom you may love; and considering yourself as
bound in honour to Elizabeth, this struggle may occasion the poignant
misery which you appear to feel."

"My dear father, reassure yourself.  I love my cousin tenderly and
sincerely.  I never saw any woman who excited, as Elizabeth does, my
warmest admiration and affection.  My future hopes and prospects are
entirely bound up in the expectation of our union."

"The expression of your sentiments of this subject, my dear Victor,
gives me more pleasure than I have for some time experienced.  If you
feel thus, we shall assuredly be happy, however present events may cast
a gloom over us.  But it is this gloom which appears to have taken so
strong a hold of your mind that I wish to dissipate.  Tell me,
therefore, whether you object to an immediate solemnization of the
marriage.  We have been unfortunate, and recent events have drawn us
from that everyday tranquillity befitting my years and infirmities. You
are younger; yet I do not suppose, possessed as you are of a competent
fortune, that an early marriage would at all interfere with any future
plans of honour and utility that you may have formed.  Do not suppose,
however, that I wish to dictate happiness to you or that a delay on
your part would cause me any serious uneasiness.  Interpret my words
with candour and answer me, I conjure you, with confidence and
sincerity."

I listened to my father in silence and remained for some time incapable
of offering any reply.  I revolved rapidly in my mind a multitude of
thoughts and endeavoured to arrive at some conclusion.  Alas!  To me
the idea of an immediate union with my Elizabeth was one of horror and
dismay.  I was bound by a solemn promise which I had not yet fulfilled
and dared not break, or if I did, what manifold miseries might not
impend over me and my devoted family!  Could I enter into a festival
with this deadly weight yet hanging round my neck and bowing me to the
ground?  I must perform my engagement and let the monster depart with
his mate before I allowed myself to enjoy the delight of a union from
which I expected peace.

I remembered also the necessity imposed upon me of either journeying to
England or entering into a long correspondence with those philosophers
of that country whose knowledge and discoveries were of indispensable
use to me in my present undertaking.  The latter method of obtaining
the desired intelligence was dilatory and unsatisfactory; besides, I
had an insurmountable aversion to the idea of engaging myself in my
loathsome task in my father's house while in habits of familiar
intercourse with those I loved.  I knew that a thousand fearful
accidents might occur, the slightest of which would disclose a tale to
thrill all connected with me with horror.  I was aware also that I
should often lose all self-command, all capacity of hiding the
harrowing sensations that would possess me during the progress of my
unearthly occupation.  I must absent myself from all I loved while thus
employed.  Once commenced, it would quickly be achieved, and I might be
restored to my family in peace and happiness.  My promise fulfilled,
the monster would depart forever.  Or (so my fond fancy imaged) some
accident might meanwhile occur to destroy him and put an end to my
slavery forever.

These feelings dictated my answer to my father.  I expressed a wish to
visit England, but concealing the true reasons of this request, I
clothed my desires under a guise which excited no suspicion, while I
urged my desire with an earnestness that easily induced my father to
comply.  After so long a period of an absorbing melancholy that
resembled madness in its intensity and effects, he was glad to find
that I was capable of taking pleasure in the idea of such a journey,
and he hoped that change of scene and varied amusement would, before my
return, have restored me entirely to myself.

The duration of my absence was left to my own choice; a few months, or
at most a year, was the period contemplated.  One paternal kind
precaution he had taken to ensure my having a companion.  Without
previously communicating with me, he had, in concert with Elizabeth,
arranged that Clerval should join me at Strasbourg.  This interfered
with the solitude I coveted for the prosecution of my task; yet at the
commencement of my journey the presence of my friend could in no way be
an impediment, and truly I rejoiced that thus I should be saved many
hours of lonely, maddening reflection.  Nay, Henry might stand between
me and the intrusion of my foe.  If I were alone, would he not at times
force his abhorred presence on me to remind me of my task or to
contemplate its progress?

To England, therefore, I was bound, and it was understood that my union
with Elizabeth should take place immediately on my return.  My father's
age rendered him extremely averse to delay.  For myself, there was one
reward I promised myself from my detested toils--one consolation for my
unparalleled sufferings; it was the prospect of that day when,
enfranchised from my miserable slavery, I might claim Elizabeth and
forget the past in my union with her.

I now made arrangements for my journey, but one feeling haunted me
which filled me with fear and agitation.  During my absence I should
leave my friends unconscious of the existence of their enemy and
unprotected from his attacks, exasperated as he might be by my
departure.  But he had promised to follow me wherever I might go, and
would he not accompany me to England?  This imagination was dreadful in
itself, but soothing inasmuch as it supposed the safety of my friends.
I was agonized with the idea of the possibility that the reverse of
this might happen.  But through the whole period during which I was the
slave of my creature I allowed myself to be governed by the impulses of
the moment; and my present sensations strongly intimated that the fiend
would follow me and exempt my family from the danger of his
machinations.

It was in the latter end of September that I again quitted my native
country.  My journey had been my own suggestion, and Elizabeth
therefore acquiesced, but she was filled with disquiet at the idea of
my suffering, away from her, the inroads of misery and grief.  It had
been her care which provided me a companion in Clerval--and yet a man
is blind to a thousand minute circumstances which call forth a woman's
sedulous attention.  She longed to bid me hasten my return; a thousand
conflicting emotions rendered her mute as she bade me a tearful, silent
farewell.

I threw myself into the carriage that was to convey me away, hardly
knowing whither I was going, and careless of what was passing around.
I remembered only, and it was with a bitter anguish that I reflected on
it, to order that my chemical instruments should be packed to go with
me.  Filled with dreary imaginations, I passed through many beautiful
and majestic scenes, but my eyes were fixed and unobserving.  I could
only think of the bourne of my travels and the work which was to occupy
me whilst they endured.

After some days spent in listless indolence, during which I traversed
many leagues, I arrived at Strasbourg, where I waited two days for
Clerval.  He came.  Alas, how great was the contrast between us!  He
was alive to every new scene, joyful when he saw the beauties of the
setting sun, and more happy when he beheld it rise and recommence a new
day.  He pointed out to me the shifting colours of the landscape and
the appearances of the sky.  "This is what it is to live," he cried;
"how I enjoy existence!  But you, my dear Frankenstein, wherefore are
you desponding and sorrowful!" In truth, I was occupied by gloomy
thoughts and neither saw the descent of the evening star nor the golden
sunrise reflected in the Rhine.  And you, my friend, would be far more
amused with the journal of Clerval, who observed the scenery with an
eye of feeling and delight, than in listening to my reflections.  I, a
miserable wretch, haunted by a curse that shut up every avenue to
enjoyment.

We had agreed to descend the Rhine in a boat from Strasbourg to
Rotterdam, whence we might take shipping for London.  During this
voyage we passed many willowy islands and saw several beautiful towns.
We stayed a day at Mannheim, and on the fifth from our departure from
Strasbourg, arrived at Mainz.  The course of the Rhine below Mainz
becomes much more picturesque.  The river descends rapidly and winds
between hills, not high, but steep, and of beautiful forms.  We saw
many ruined castles standing on the edges of precipices, surrounded by
black woods, high and inaccessible.  This part of the Rhine, indeed,
presents a singularly variegated landscape.  In one spot you view
rugged hills, ruined castles overlooking tremendous precipices, with
the dark Rhine rushing beneath; and on the sudden turn of a promontory,
flourishing vineyards with green sloping banks and a meandering river
and populous towns occupy the scene.

We travelled at the time of the vintage and heard the song of the
labourers as we glided down the stream.  Even I, depressed in mind, and
my spirits continually agitated by gloomy feelings, even I was pleased.
I lay at the bottom of the boat, and as I gazed on the cloudless blue
sky, I seemed to drink in a tranquillity to which I had long been a
stranger.  And if these were my sensations, who can describe those of
Henry?  He felt as if he had been transported to fairy-land and enjoyed
a happiness seldom tasted by man.  "I have seen," he said, "the most
beautiful scenes of my own country; I have visited the lakes of Lucerne
and Uri, where the snowy mountains descend almost perpendicularly to
the water, casting black and impenetrable shades, which would cause a
gloomy and mournful appearance were it not for the most verdant islands
that believe the eye by their gay appearance; I have seen this lake
agitated by a tempest, when the wind tore up whirlwinds of water and
gave you an idea of what the water-spout must be on the great ocean;
and the waves dash with fury the base of the mountain, where the priest
and his mistress were overwhelmed by an avalanche and where their dying
voices are still said to be heard amid the pauses of the nightly wind;
I have seen the mountains of La Valais, and the Pays de Vaud; but this
country, Victor, pleases me more than all those wonders.  The mountains
of Switzerland are more majestic and strange, but there is a charm in
the banks of this divine river that I never before saw equalled.  Look
at that castle which overhangs yon precipice; and that also on the
island, almost concealed amongst the foliage of those lovely trees; and
now that group of labourers coming from among their vines; and that
village half hid in the recess of the mountain.  Oh, surely the spirit
that inhabits and guards this place has a soul more in harmony with man
than those who pile the glacier or retire to the inaccessible peaks of
the mountains of our own country." Clerval!  Beloved friend!  Even now
it delights me to record your words and to dwell on the praise of which
you are so eminently deserving.  He was a being formed in the "very
poetry of nature." His wild and enthusiastic imagination was chastened
by the sensibility of his heart.  His soul overflowed with ardent
affections, and his friendship was of that devoted and wondrous nature
that the world-minded teach us to look for only in the imagination. But
even human sympathies were not sufficient to satisfy his eager mind.
The scenery of external nature, which others regard only with
admiration, he loved with ardour:--


     ----The sounding cataract
     Haunted him like a passion:  the tall rock,
     The mountain, and the deep and gloomy wood,
     Their colours and their forms, were then to him
     An appetite; a feeling, and a love,
     That had no need of a remoter charm,
     By thought supplied, or any interest
     Unborrow'd from the eye.

                    [Wordsworth's "Tintern Abbey".]


And where does he now exist?  Is this gentle and lovely being lost
forever?  Has this mind, so replete with ideas, imaginations fanciful
and magnificent, which formed a world, whose existence depended on the
life of its creator;--has this mind perished?  Does it now only exist
in my memory?  No, it is not thus; your form so divinely wrought, and
beaming with beauty, has decayed, but your spirit still visits and
consoles your unhappy friend.

Pardon this gush of sorrow; these ineffectual words are but a slight
tribute to the unexampled worth of Henry, but they soothe my heart,
overflowing with the anguish which his remembrance creates.  I will
proceed with my tale.

Beyond Cologne we descended to the plains of Holland; and we resolved
to post the remainder of our way, for the wind was contrary and the
stream of the river was too gentle to aid us.  Our journey here lost
the interest arising from beautiful scenery, but we arrived in a few
days at Rotterdam, whence we proceeded by sea to England.  It was on a
clear morning, in the latter days of December, that I first saw the
white cliffs of Britain.  The banks of the Thames presented a new
scene; they were flat but fertile, and almost every town was marked by
the remembrance of some story.  We saw Tilbury Fort and remembered the
Spanish Armada, Gravesend, Woolwich, and Greenwich--places which I had
heard of even in my country.

At length we saw the numerous steeples of London, St. Paul's towering
above all, and the Tower famed in English history.



Chapter 19

London was our present point of rest; we determined to remain several
months in this wonderful and celebrated city.  Clerval desired the
intercourse of the men of genius and talent who flourished at this
time, but this was with me a secondary object; I was principally
occupied with the means of obtaining the information necessary for the
completion of my promise and quickly availed myself of the letters of
introduction that I had brought with me, addressed to the most
distinguished natural philosophers.

If this journey had taken place during my days of study and happiness,
it would have afforded me inexpressible pleasure.  But a blight had
come over my existence, and I only visited these people for the sake of
the information they might give me on the subject in which my interest
was so terribly profound.  Company was irksome to me; when alone, I
could fill my mind with the sights of heaven and earth; the voice of
Henry soothed me, and I could thus cheat myself into a transitory
peace.  But busy, uninteresting, joyous faces brought back despair to
my heart.  I saw an insurmountable barrier placed between me and my
fellow men; this barrier was sealed with the blood of William and
Justine, and to reflect on the events connected with those names filled
my soul with anguish.

But in Clerval I saw the image of my former self; he was inquisitive
and anxious to gain experience and instruction.  The difference of
manners which he observed was to him an inexhaustible source of
instruction and amusement.  He was also pursuing an object he had long
had in view.  His design was to visit India, in the belief that he had
in his knowledge of its various languages, and in the views he had
taken of its society, the means of materially assisting the progress of
European colonization and trade.  In Britain only could he further the
execution of his plan.  He was forever busy, and the only check to his
enjoyments was my sorrowful and dejected mind.  I tried to conceal this
as much as possible, that I might not debar him from the pleasures
natural to one who was entering on a new scene of life, undisturbed by
any care or bitter recollection.  I often refused to accompany him,
alleging another engagement, that I might remain alone.  I now also
began to collect the materials necessary for my new creation, and this
was to me like the torture of single drops of water continually falling
on the head.  Every thought that was devoted to it was an extreme
anguish, and every word that I spoke in allusion to it caused my lips
to quiver, and my heart to palpitate.

After passing some months in London, we received a letter from a person
in Scotland who had formerly been our visitor at Geneva.  He mentioned
the beauties of his native country and asked us if those were not
sufficient allurements to induce us to prolong our journey as far north
as Perth, where he resided.  Clerval eagerly desired to accept this
invitation, and I, although I abhorred society, wished to view again
mountains and streams and all the wondrous works with which Nature
adorns her chosen dwelling-places.  We had arrived in England at the
beginning of October, and it was now February.  We accordingly
determined to commence our journey towards the north at the expiration
of another month.  In this expedition we did not intend to follow the
great road to Edinburgh, but to visit Windsor, Oxford, Matlock, and the
Cumberland lakes, resolving to arrive at the completion of this tour
about the end of July.  I packed up my chemical instruments and the
materials I had collected, resolving to finish my labours in some
obscure nook in the northern highlands of Scotland.

We quitted London on the 27th of March and remained a few days at
Windsor, rambling in its beautiful forest.  This was a new scene to us
mountaineers; the majestic oaks, the quantity of game, and the herds of
